README.md, before:

## Instructions

``` bash
cd your-project
git clone https://github.com/bentdixon/labl-utils.git
```

### Using `transcript_utils`

``` python
from utils.transcript_utils import Transcript, ClinicalGroup

# Must set the transcript directory first, containing CHR and HC subdirectories
Transcript.set_directory_path("/data/transcripts")

# Iterate through all transcripts
for transcript in Transcript.list_transcripts():
    print(transcript.filename)
    print(len(transcript.participant_lines))

# Define transcript objects
t1 = Transcript("CHR/subject_001/interview.txt")
t2 = Transcript("HC/subject_042/interview.txt")

# Access properties
print(t1.group_status)           # ClinicalGroup.CHR
print(len(t1.lines))             # Total line count
print(len(t1.participant_lines)) # Participant utterances only
print(len(t1.interviewer_lines)) # Interviewer utterances only

# Iterate over lines
for line in t1.participant_lines:
    print(f"{line.line_number}: {line.timestamp} - {line.text}")
```

### Using `combine_data`

``` python
from utils.combine_data import combine_csvs

# Expects CSV with `patient_id` column, optionally `clinical_status`, and then metric columns
c1 = "some/path/data.csv" # `patient_id`, `metric_1`
c2 = "some/path/data.csv" # `patient_id`, `clinical_status`, `_metric_2`

# Results in combined Polars DataFrame with `patient_id`, `clinincal_status`, `metric_1`, `metric_2`, matched on `patient_id`
combined_data = combine_csvs(c1, c2)
```

Commit message:

Preparing for upcoming Data Release with more functions for transcript parsing - get language, get site, and assign roles

README.md, after:

# Instructions

``` bash
cd your-project
git clone https://github.com/bentdixon/labl-utils.git
```

## Using `utils/`

Example usages of scripts and functions in the `utils/` subfolder.

### `transcript_utils.py`

Implements `Transcript` object - see Python file for complete list of parameters and methods. Allows for easy iteration through directories, easy text parsing, and automatic assignment of site location, clinical status (when available), and patient ID.

``` python
from utils.transcript_utils import Transcript, ClinicalGroup

# Set the transcript directory first, containing CHR and HC subdirectories. Recommended, not enforced. 
# Allows for `list_transcripts()` class method to be used and more robust path-handling of transcripts.  
Transcript.set_directory_path("/data/transcripts")

# Iterate through all transcripts
for transcript in Transcript.list_transcripts():
    print(transcript.filename)
    print(len(transcript.participant_lines))

# Define transcript objects
t1 = Transcript("CHR/subject_001/interview.txt")
t2 = Transcript("HC/subject_042/interview.txt")

# Access properties
print(t1.patient_id)             # PatientID string when filenames in typical AMP SCZ format
print(t1.group_status)           # ClinicalGroup.CHR
print(len(t1.lines))             # Total line count
print(len(t1.participant_lines)) # Participant utterances only
print(len(t1.interviewer_lines)) # Interviewer utterances only

# Iterate over lines
for line in t1.participant_lines:
    print(f"{line.line_number}: {line.timestamp} - {line.text}")
```

### `combine_data.py`

Used to combine efficiently combine CSVs with `patient_id` columns, and optionally, `clinical_status`, appending all other columns afterwards. Uses Polars to support memory-efficient loading and speedy operations.

``` python
from utils.combine_data import combine_csvs

# Expects CSV with `patient_id` column, optionally `clinical_status`, and then metric columns
c1 = "some/path/data.csv" # `patient_id`, `metric_1`
c2 = "some/path/data.csv" # `patient_id`, `clinical_status`, `metric_2`

# Results in combined Polars DataFrame with `patient_id`, `clinincal_status`, `metric_1`, `metric_2`, matched on `patient_id`
combined_data = combine_csvs(c1, c2)
```

## Using `cli/`

Example usages of command line interface tools in the `cli/` subfolder.

### `assign_roles.py`

Uses GPT-OSS to decide PARTICIPANT and INTERVIEWER speaker tags. Optional thinking flag to configure length of thinking. Flag to change model coming soon. Output directory is optional, will replace S1 and S2 in-place if not given, else it will create a new directory at specified location and copy transcripts.

``` console
(env) user@gpu:/data/labl-utils$ python cli/assign_roles.py --i "some/directory/with/transcripts/" --o "some/other/location" --thinking "high" --gpu {0-6}
```

### `structure_transcripts.py`
